@node sb-fiber
@section sb-fiber
@cindex Fiber
@cindex Coroutine
@cindex Stackful coroutine
@cindex Sb-fiber

@code{sb-fiber} provides @dfn{stackful coroutines} (fibers): user-space
execution contexts with their own control stack and binding stack that
survive suspension.  Fibers are cooperatively scheduled and confined to
a single OS thread (no cross-thread migration).  A typical fiber switch
costs ~100 ns on x86-64; suspended fibers cost ~160 KiB of virtual
address space each (of which only the active stack tip is populated).

The contrib is a @emph{primitive} -- @code{fiber-switch} is the only
control-transfer operation -- not a framework.  Schedulers, I/O
integration, fiber-aware synchronization, and other machinery built
on top of @code{fiber-switch} live in user code.  See
@code{contrib/sb-fiber/examples/banner-server.lisp} for a ~280-line
example that layers a @code{poll}-based userspace scheduler on top of
the primitive and serves ~11,000 HTTP requests per second from a
single OS thread.

@subsection When to use fibers

Use @code{sb-fiber} when:

@itemize
@item A computation needs to suspend deep in a call chain and resume
later with every let-binding, handler-case, unwind-protect, and loop
state intact.  The motivating case is an I/O operation buried under
multiple layers of protocol logic that needs to yield to a scheduler
without unwinding.

@item You need thousands of concurrent logical tasks per OS thread.
Fibers are cheap relative to OS threads (~160 KiB VA each vs. several
MiB; no kernel state; context-switch is a register shuffle, not a
syscall).
@end itemize

Do @emph{not} use fibers when:

@itemize
@item You need preemption.  Fibers are strictly cooperative; a runaway
fiber monopolizes its carrier thread until it yields or exits.

@item You need cross-thread work-stealing.  A fiber stays on its birth
thread for life.  Load-balance at admission (choose the carrier thread
when you create the fiber) rather than mid-flight.

@item You'd otherwise use @code{(sb-ext:run-program ... :wait nil)} or
@code{sb-thread:make-thread} for the same workload.  Fibers don't
replace OS threads; they multiply the number of logical tasks @emph{per}
OS thread.
@end itemize

@subsection Glossary

@table @asis
@item Fiber
A suspended (or running) coroutine, represented by an
@code{sb-fiber:fiber} object.  Owns a mmap'd native stack and binding
stack, plus saved register state.

@item Main fiber
A fiber object representing the OS thread's own stack.  Created by
@code{make-main-fiber}; used as the @code{from} or @code{to} of
@code{fiber-switch} when yielding from or resuming to the thread's
primordial context.  Must be created once per thread that uses fibers.

@item New
A fiber state: created (by @code{make-fiber}) but never switched to.

@item Runnable
A fiber state: suspended, eligible to be the @code{to} of a
@code{fiber-switch}.

@item Running
A fiber state: currently executing.  Exactly one fiber on each thread
is in this state.

@item Dead
A fiber state: its entry function has returned and it has not yet been
switched to a fresh one.  Cannot be resumed.

@item Return fiber
The fiber that will receive control when the current fiber's entry
function returns naturally.  Set implicitly on each @code{fiber-switch}
to the switcher.
@end table

@subsection API

@subsubsection Lifecycle

@deffn Function make-fiber function &key (stack-size 65536) (binding-stack-size 8192)
Create a new fiber that will execute @var{function} (a zero-
argument closure) when first switched to.  @var{stack-size} is the
usable control-stack size in bytes; the allocation adds three
@code{STACK_GUARD_SIZE} regions on top for overflow detection.
@var{binding-stack-size} is the usable binding-stack size.  Returns a
@code{fiber} object.  Must be destroyed with @code{destroy-fiber} when
no longer needed.

When the entry function returns normally, the fiber is marked
@code{:dead} and control auto-switches to the fiber that most recently
switched to it.

When the entry function exits via an unhandled condition, the
condition is stashed on the fiber; the next @code{fiber-switch} out of
this fiber (via the auto-return path) re-signals it in the caller's
context.  The fiber itself never propagates a condition across its
boundary (that would require unwinding frames on another fiber's
stack; see @emph{IMPL-344}).
@end deffn

@deffn Function make-main-fiber
Create a fiber object representing the current thread's own stack.
Stacks are not owned -- the thread's are the source of truth; the
main fiber just records bounds so a later switch back can restore
them.  Binds @code{*current-fiber*} on the calling thread as a side
effect.  Must be destroyed after all fiber switching on this thread
is done.
@end deffn

@deffn Function destroy-fiber fiber
Release @var{fiber}'s stacks.  @var{fiber} must not be currently
running.  For default-sized fibers owned by the current thread, the
implementation pools the fiber instead of @code{munmap}ing; subsequent
@code{make-fiber} calls with default sizes draw from the pool.  The
pool is per-thread and bounded (see @code{FIBER_POOL_MAX} in
@code{fiber.h}); fibers beyond the cap are released to the kernel.
@end deffn

@deffn Macro with-fiber (var function &rest make-args) &body body
Create a fiber bound to @var{var}, execute @var{body}, destroy on exit
(including non-local exit).  @var{make-args} are forwarded to
@code{make-fiber}.
@end deffn

@subsubsection Control transfer

@deffn Function fiber-switch from to
Suspend @var{from} and resume @var{to}.  Both must be registered to
the current thread, @var{from} must be @code{:running}, and @var{to}
must be @code{:runnable} or @code{:new}.  Returns when another
fiber switches back to @var{from}, or when @var{to}'s entry function
returns (which auto-switches back).

Preserves across the switch: @var{to}'s control stack, binding stack,
@code{*handler-clusters*}, @code{*restart-clusters*}, current catch
block, current unwind-protect block, callee-saved registers.  Also
flips @code{*current-fiber*} (per-thread) to track @var{to} while it
runs.

If @var{to}'s entry function previously escaped via an unhandled
condition, that condition is re-signaled in the caller's context
here.
@end deffn

@deffn Function current-fiber
Return the fiber currently running on this thread, or @code{nil} if
no main fiber has been established.  Equivalent to the
@code{*current-fiber*} special variable, but exported as a function
for use in contexts where a defvar reference would be awkward.
@end deffn

@subsubsection Park / unpark

@code{fiber-park} and @code{fiber-unpark} are a cooperative
wakeup-token pair intended as the substrate for a scheduler.  They
are not themselves a scheduler: @code{fiber-unpark} only flips a
state bit, leaving the caller responsible for putting the fiber back
on whatever runqueue the scheduler maintains.

The primitive exists because a naive ``set a flag then
fiber-switch'' implementation has a lost-wakeup race: an unpark
landing between the flag-set and the switch would leave the fiber
suspended forever.  The wakeup token's @code{:pending} state absorbs
an unpark that arrives before the matching park.

@deffn Function fiber-park target
Suspend the current fiber and @code{fiber-switch} to @var{target}
(typically a scheduler fiber).  Returns when execution switches back
here -- usually because some caller has invoked @code{fiber-unpark}
on us and the scheduler has picked us up again.

If @code{fiber-unpark} was called on the current fiber before this
@code{fiber-park}, the pending-wakeup credit is consumed and
@code{fiber-park} returns immediately without switching.  Multiple
pre-credited unparks collapse into one credit.
@end deffn

@deffn Function fiber-unpark fiber
Mark @var{fiber} as runnable and return @code{t} if the caller should
now add @var{fiber} back to a scheduler runqueue (@var{fiber} was
parked).  Return @code{nil} if @var{fiber} was not parked; in that
case a wakeup credit is stashed, and a subsequent @code{fiber-park}
on @var{fiber} will consume it without suspending.

Idempotent, signal-handler safe.  Does not switch or enqueue: the
scheduler layered on top of @code{fiber-park} / @code{fiber-unpark}
owns that half of the contract.
@end deffn

@subsubsection Introspection

@deffn Function fiber-alive-p fiber
Return @code{t} if @var{fiber} has not yet had its entry function
return and has not been destroyed.  Aliveness covers @code{:new},
@code{:runnable}, @code{:running}, and fibers that exited via a
pending condition (not yet re-signaled).
@end deffn

@deffn Function fiber-state fiber
Return the integer state of @var{fiber}, one of the constants
@code{+fiber-new+} (0), @code{+fiber-runnable+} (1),
@code{+fiber-running+} (2), @code{+fiber-dead+} (3).  Returns
@code{+fiber-dead+} for a destroyed fiber.
@end deffn

@deffn Function fiber-binding-stack-usage fiber
@deffnx Function fiber-binding-stack-size fiber
@deffnx Function fiber-control-stack-usage fiber
@deffnx Function fiber-control-stack-size fiber
Report stack utilization of @var{fiber} in bytes.  @code{-usage}
returns the bytes consumed as of @var{fiber}'s last switch-out (or
zero for a @code{:new} fiber); @code{-size} returns the usable
capacity excluding guard pages.  The invariant @code{(<= usage size)}
holds for correctly-bounded fibers.

For a @code{:running} fiber the @code{-usage} numbers are stale --
they reflect the last switch-out, not the live register/pointer
values.  Live binding-stack usage is available from within a running
fiber via @code{sb-kernel:binding-stack-usage}.

For a main fiber the @code{-usage} accessors return zero (main fibers
do not own their stacks); @code{-size} returns the visible native
range captured at @code{make-main-fiber} time.
@end deffn

@subsection A minimal example

@lisp
(require :sb-fiber)
(use-package :sb-fiber)

(let* ((main  (make-main-fiber))
       (child (make-fiber
               (lambda ()
                 (format t "hello from ~S~%" (current-fiber))
                 (fiber-switch (current-fiber) main)
                 (format t "back again~%")))))
  (fiber-switch main child)
  (format t "main resumed~%")
  (fiber-switch main child)
  (destroy-fiber child)
  (destroy-fiber main))
@end lisp

Prints:
@example
hello from #<FIBER @dots{}>
main resumed
back again
@end example

@subsection A cooperative scheduler in ~80 lines

The pattern:

@lisp
(defvar *scheduler*)          ; the main fiber
(defvar *runnable*)           ; fifo of ready fibers

(defun yield ()
  (push (current-fiber) *runnable*)  ; or other discipline
  (fiber-switch (current-fiber) *scheduler*))

(defun spawn (fn)
  (push (make-fiber fn) *runnable*))

(defun run-scheduler ()
  (loop while *runnable*
        do (let ((f (pop *runnable*)))
             (fiber-switch *scheduler* f))))

(defun main ()
  (let ((*scheduler* (make-main-fiber))
        (*runnable* '()))
    (spawn (lambda () (dotimes (i 3) (print i) (yield))))
    (spawn (lambda () (dotimes (i 3) (print (* 10 i)) (yield))))
    (run-scheduler)))
@end lisp

Running @code{(main)} prints @code{0, 0, 1, 10, 2, 20}: the two
fibers round-robin through their three @code{yield}s.

A realistic scheduler layers non-blocking I/O on top -- when a fiber
would block reading from an fd, it registers the fd with
@code{poll}/@code{epoll}/@code{kqueue} and yields; the scheduler's
poll loop wakes it when ready.  See the @code{banner-server.lisp}
example.

@subsection Caveats

@itemize
@item @strong{Platforms.}  x86-64 Linux and AArch64 Linux/macOS only.
Windows is not supported.

@item @strong{No migration.}  A fiber created on thread A cannot run
on thread B.  @code{fiber-switch} enforces this.

@item @strong{No preemption.}  A fiber yields only by calling
@code{fiber-switch} (or by letting its entry function return).  Tight
compute loops starve the scheduler.

@item @strong{Handler-chain isolation.}  A fiber's user code runs with
a fresh @code{*handler-clusters*} / @code{*restart-clusters*}.
Conditions signaled inside the fiber do @emph{not} see handlers
established on the stack that called @code{fiber-switch}.  This is a
correctness requirement (see @emph{IMPL-344}) -- handler bodies close
over @code{return-from} exit points on the caller's stack, and
unwinding to them from a different fiber's stack is undefined behavior.
If you need to propagate errors out of a fiber, let them escape
normally -- they'll be re-signaled in the caller's context on the next
@code{fiber-switch}.

@item @strong{Binding-stack overflow is fatal, not recoverable.}
Control-stack overflow is detected and raised as a
@code{storage-condition} thanks to the HARD/SOFT/RETURN three-guard
layout.  Binding-stack overflow instead faults on a hard
@code{PROT_NONE} guard page at the top of the fiber's binding
stack, so a runaway @code{progv} or deep special-rebinding hits
@code{SIGSEGV} and the process terminates with a memory-fault
diagnostic.  The overflow is not recovered into a condition: the
main-thread
@code{BINDING_STACK_@{HARD,SOFT,RETURN@}_GUARD_PAGE} macros in
@code{validate.h} derive guard addresses from a compile-time 1 MiB
size and don't recognize a fiber's 8 KiB guard, so the fault falls
through to SBCL's generic @code{"Memory fault"} handler rather than
raising @code{BINDING-STACK-EXHAUSTED-ERROR}.  Size the binding
stack with headroom accordingly.

@item @strong{VA footprint.}  ~160 KiB virtual address space per
fiber on builds where @code{BACKEND_PAGE_BYTES = 32 KiB} (three
32 KiB guard regions plus a 64 KiB stack plus a small binding stack).
On builds with smaller page size, proportionally less.  RSS is
dominated by the active stack tip, typically single-digit KiB.

@item @strong{@code{sb-sprof} behavior.}  A sample taken while a
fiber is running attributes the sample to the fiber's stack at that
instant.  Samples taken while the fiber is suspended don't see it.
Backtraces inside a fiber walk correctly.

@item @strong{Debugger interactions.}  Backtraces are correct.
Stepping across a @code{fiber-switch} has not been explicitly tested
and may surprise you (the "next" instruction in source order is on a
different stack).
@end itemize

@subsection Relationship to @code{sb-thread}

@code{sb-thread} and @code{sb-fiber} are orthogonal:

@itemize
@item An OS thread is preemptively scheduled by the kernel; a fiber is
cooperatively scheduled by user code.

@item Threads can share data via locks and atomics; fibers on the same
thread share data without locks (they never interleave without an
explicit @code{fiber-switch}).

@item A mutex held by one fiber is held by that fiber's OS thread;
another fiber on the same thread cannot acquire it (at the
@code{sb-thread:grab-mutex} level it looks held by "this thread").
User-level fiber-aware locks built on top of @code{fiber-switch} are
the way to handle this.

@item @code{sb-thread:make-thread} plus multiple fibers per thread is
the idiomatic M:N shape.  Create N threads, each with its own main
fiber and scheduler; balance work at admission.
@end itemize

@subsection Files and layout

@itemize
@item @code{contrib/sb-fiber/fiber.lisp} -- Lisp API and alien bindings.
@item @code{contrib/sb-fiber/fiber-vops-x86-64.lisp} -- register-swap VOP.
@item @code{contrib/sb-fiber/fiber-vops-arm64.lisp} -- register-swap VOP.
@item @code{contrib/sb-fiber/examples/banner-server.lisp} -- demo HTTP server.
@item @code{src/runtime/fiber.@{h,c@}} -- portable C runtime.
@item @code{src/runtime/fiber-x86-64.@{h,c@}}, @code{fiber_switch_amd64.S} -- x86-64 backend.
@item @code{src/runtime/fiber-arm64.@{h,c@}}, @code{fiber_switch_arm64.S} -- arm64 backend.
@item @code{src/runtime/gencgc.c}, @code{pmrgc.c} -- GC hooks.
@item @code{src/runtime/thread.h} -- per-thread @code{fiber_list} and pool.
@item @code{tests/fiber.pure.lisp} -- 19 unit tests.
@item @code{tests/fiber.impure.lisp} -- 22 GC / concurrency / perf / regression tests.
@end itemize
